[Docs] ES|QL Data Federation (#146945)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/query-languages/esql/esql-data-federation-datasets.md

The **Datasets** tab lists each dataset including:
- its data source and data source type
- its resource
- its description

From this tab you can search your datasets, filter by data source, add a new one, and edit or delete an existing one.

:::{image} images/data-federation/datasets-tab.png
:alt: The Datasets tab listing several datasets with their data sources, resources, and edit and delete row actions
:width: 800px
:::

### Add a new dataset

Click **Add dataset** to open a flyout where you define the dataset:

- **Data source**: the connected data source to read through.
- **Name**: a unique name for use in queries.
- **Description**: an optional description.
- **Resource**: the URI and glob pattern that selects the files to read.
- **Format**: the file format. This selection is required in the {{kib}} UI. The API can omit `settings.format` to auto-detect it from the file extension. Refer to [supported file formats](#supported-file-formats).

To configure how the format is read, expand **Advanced settings**. Refer to [dataset settings](#dataset-settings).

> :::{dropdown} Show the Add dataset flyout

Reviewer: ```suggestion
::::{dropdown} Show the Add dataset flyout
```

:::{image} images/data-federation/add-dataset.png
:alt: The Add dataset flyout configured for a Parquet dataset over an Amazon S3 data source
:width: 450px
:::

> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
::::
```

|---|---|---|
| `segment_size` | `4mb` | The unit a file is divided into for parallel reading. Minimum 64 KiB. |
| `datetime_format` | `strict_date_optional_time` | The pattern used to infer and parse date and time values. |

### Parquet

Parquet is self-describing and is read with no settings in the common case. Its two settings are read-performance toggles, defaulted on.

| Setting | Default | Description |
|---|---|---|
| `optimized_reader` | `true` | Uses vectorized decoding, page skipping, and I/O prefetch for the next row group. Leave enabled for normal scans. Disable it only to troubleshoot a suspected optimized-reader issue by using the baseline read path. |
| `late_materialization` | `true` | When a filter can be pushed to the reader, reads predicate columns first and materializes other projected columns only for surviving rows. This is most useful for selective queries over wide files. Leave enabled unless you are troubleshooting filter or read-path behavior. |

## How schemas are inferred

Because federated data does not live in {{es}}, the system discovers schemas before queries can run. How this works depends on the file format.

### Schema sources by format

> For **Parquet**, schemas are read from file headers. These formats also provide metadata like column statistics and bloom filters that the engine uses to skip irrelevant data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Parquet reads its schema from file metadata, which also provides column statistics and bloom filters that the engine uses to skip irrelevant data.
```

> For **CSV and NDJSON**, schemas are inferred by sampling rows from the data files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For **CSV, TSV, and NDJSON**, schemas are inferred by sampling rows from the data files.
```

Author: nice catch thanks!

---
navigation_title: "Add datasets"
description: "Create ES|QL Data Federation datasets to query files in external storage. Choose file formats, adjust Parquet and CSV parsing, and control schema inference."
applies_to:
  stack: preview =9.5
  serverless: preview
products:
  - id: elasticsearch
---

# Select external datasets for {{esql}} Data Federation

> A dataset points at specific files within a [data source](esql-data-federation-sources.md) and makes them queryable as a virtual index. It references a data source by name and specifies a resource path that identifies the files to read. Datasets share the same namespace as indices, aliases, and [{{esql}} views](esql-views.md). A dataset cannot have the same name as an existing index.

Reviewer 2: Namespace also covers data streams; state the list identically everywhere.

```suggestion
Datasets share the same namespace as indices, data streams, aliases, and [{{esql}} views](esql-views.md). A dataset cannot have the same name as any of them.
```

Author: good catch thanks!

:::{image} images/data-federation/add-dataset.png
:alt: The Add dataset flyout configured for a Parquet dataset over an Amazon S3 data source
:width: 450px
:::
::::

## Manage datasets using the API

Datasets are managed under the `/_query/dataset` endpoint. All dataset operations require the index `manage` privilege on the dataset name, or a fine-grained dataset privilege (refer to [manage credentials and privileges](esql-data-federation-security.md)).

| Operation | Endpoint |
|---|---|
| [Create or update](#create-or-update-a-dataset) | `PUT /_query/dataset/{name}` |
| [Get](#get-a-dataset) | `GET /_query/dataset/{name}` |
| [List all](#list-all-datasets) | `GET /_query/dataset` |
| [Delete](#delete-a-dataset) | `DELETE /_query/dataset/{name}` |

<!-- # https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-esql-put-dataset -->
<!-- # https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-esql-get-dataset -->
<!-- # https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-esql-delete-dataset -->

### Create or update a dataset

`PUT` creates a new dataset or replaces an existing one entirely.

:::{important}

> A dataset cannot have the same name as an existing index, alias, or view, because dataset names share the same namespace. Dataset names must be lowercase and cannot begin with `-`, `_`, or `+`.

Reviewer 2: Add data streams to the namespace list.

```suggestion
A dataset cannot have the same name as an existing index, data stream, alias, or view, because dataset names share the same namespace. Dataset names must be lowercase and cannot begin with `-`, `_`, or `+`.
```

{
  "data_source": "prod_s3_logs",
  "resource": "s3://logs-bucket/access/**/*.csv",
  "mappings": {
    "dynamic": "false",
    "properties": {
      "@timestamp": {
        "type": "date",
        "path": "event_time",
        "format": "yyyy-MM-dd HH:mm:ss"
      },
      "request_id": { "type": "keyword" },
      "service": { "type": "keyword" },
      "status_code": { "type": "integer" }
    },
    "_id": {
      "path": "request_id"
    }
  }
}
```

The `mappings` block supports:

- `properties`: Columns keyed by their logical name. Each column requires a `type`.
  - `path`: Optional physical column name. Use it to expose a file column under a different logical name, including renaming a timestamp column to `@timestamp`.
  - `format`: Optional date parsing pattern for a column with type `date`.
- `_id.path`: Optional source column whose value becomes the row's `_id`.
- `dynamic`: Controls undeclared columns. The default, `true`, overlays the declared columns on the inferred schema. Set it to `false` to treat the declaration as the complete schema, skip schema inference for text formats, and leave undeclared columns unavailable to queries.

:::{note}

> With `dynamic: false`, declared columns in CSV and TSV files bind by position. For self-describing columnar formats such as Parquet, declared column names and types must match the file schema unless you use `path` to rename a column.

Reviewer 2: On 9.5 declared columns bind by **name**, not position (positional only for headerless files). Parquet accepts coercible type pairs.

```suggestion
With `dynamic: false`, declared columns bind to file columns by name. In CSV and TSV files with a header row, each declared column binds to the header column of the same name (or the name given in `path`). A declared column absent from a file reads as null with a warning, not an error. Headerless files bind by position. 

For self-describing columnar formats such as Parquet, names bind to the file schema the same way, and a declared type is accepted when the file's type can be coerced to it. Only incompatible type pairs are rejected.
```

:group: api-ref

:::{tab-item} Console
:sync: console
```console
GET /_query/dataset
```
:::

:::{tab-item} curl
:sync: curl
```bash
curl -X GET "${ELASTICSEARCH_URL}/_query/dataset" \
  -H "Authorization: ApiKey ${API_KEY}"
```
:::

::::

### Delete a dataset

Deletes a dataset by name.

::::{tab-set}
:group: api-ref

:::{tab-item} Console
:sync: console
```console
DELETE /_query/dataset/access_logs
```
:::

:::{tab-item} curl
:sync: curl
```bash
curl -X DELETE "${ELASTICSEARCH_URL}/_query/dataset/access_logs" \
  -H "Authorization: ApiKey ${API_KEY}"
```
:::

::::

## Dataset settings

Dataset settings configure how a resource's format is read. They are specified in the `settings` object of a dataset definition. They divide into settings users commonly change and advanced settings with sensible defaults.

### Common settings

The following settings apply to all file-based data sources:

| Setting | Default | Description |
|---|---|---|
| `format` | Auto-detect from extension | Override format detection. Valid values: `"parquet"`, `"csv"`, `"tsv"`, `"ndjson"`. |
| `partition_detection` | `auto` | Partition detection mode. Valid values: `"auto"`, `"hive"`, `"none"`. |

> | `schema_resolution` | `union_by_name` | How schemas are reconciled across multiple files. Valid values: `"first_file_wins"`, `"strict"`, `"union_by_name"`. Refer to [schema merge strategies](#schema-merge-strategies). |

Reviewer 2: The error-handling keys apply to every format, so they belong in Common settings (moved from CSV/TSV).

```suggestion
| `schema_resolution` | `union_by_name` | How schemas are reconciled across multiple files. Valid values: `"first_file_wins"`, `"strict"`, `"union_by_name"`. Refer to [schema merge strategies](#schema-merge-strategies). |
| `error_mode` | `fail_fast` | How malformed rows are handled. Valid values: `"fail_fast"`, `"skip_row"`, `"null_field"`. For Parquet, `skip_row` fills affected columns with null instead of skipping the entire row. |
| `max_errors` | unbounded | Maximum malformed rows allowed before the query fails. Ignored when `error_mode` is `fail_fast`. |
| `max_error_ratio` | `0.0` | Fraction of malformed rows allowed (0.0–1.0). Ignored when `error_mode` is `fail_fast`. |
```

### CSV and TSV settings

**Commonly changed:**

| Setting | Default (CSV / TSV) | Description |
|---|---|---|
| `delimiter` | `,` / `\t` | The field separator. |
| `mode` | `quoted` / `plain` | A preset bundling quoting and escaping into one choice. Valid values: `"quoted"`, `"escaped"`, `"plain"`. |
| `header_row` | `true` | Whether the first row names the columns. |
| `null_value` | `""` (empty) | The token read as null (for example `NULL`, `NA`, `\N`). |
| `encoding` | `UTF-8` | The file's character encoding. |

**Advanced:**

| Setting | Default (CSV / TSV) | Description |
|---|---|---|
| `quote` | `"` / `"` | The quote character. Subsumed by `mode`. |

> | `escape` | `\` / `\` | The escape character. Subsumed by `mode`. |

Reviewer 2: An explicit `quote`/`escape` overrides the `mode` preset (not the other way round); `"none"` disables it; TSV's `plain` baseline leaves both off.

```suggestion
| `quote` | `"` / none | The quote character, or `"none"` to turn quoting off. An explicit value overrides the `mode` preset. |
| `escape` | `\` / none | The escape character, or `"none"` to turn escaping off. An explicit value overrides the `mode` preset. |
```

| `comment` | `//` | Lines beginning with this prefix are skipped. |
| `column_prefix` | `col` | Prefix for generated column names when `header_row` is `false`. |
| `schema_sample_size` | `20000` | Rows sampled to infer column types. |
| `datetime_format` | ISO-8601 | The pattern used to parse date and time values. |
| `trim_spaces` | `false` | Whether to remove surrounding ASCII whitespace from string field values. |
| `multi_value_syntax` | `none` | Whether bracketed multi-values are recognized. Valid values: `"none"`, `"brackets"`. |
| `max_field_size` | `10485760` (10 MB) | The maximum size of a single field. `0` is unlimited. |
| `error_mode` | `fail_fast` | How a malformed row is handled. Valid values: `"fail_fast"`, `"skip_row"`, `"null_field"`. |
| `max_errors` | unbounded | Bad rows tolerated. Not valid with `fail_fast`. |

> | `max_error_ratio` | `0.0` | Fraction of bad rows tolerated (0.0–1.0). Not valid with `fail_fast`. |

Reviewer 2: Moving these three up to **Common settings** — they're format-agnostic (NDJSON and Parquet honor them too), not CSV/TSV-only.

```suggestion

```

| `optimized_reader` | `true` | Uses vectorized decoding, page skipping, and I/O prefetch for the next row group. Leave enabled for normal scans. Disable it only to troubleshoot a suspected optimized-reader issue by using the baseline read path. |
| `late_materialization` | `true` | When a filter can be pushed to the reader, reads predicate columns first and materializes other projected columns only for surviving rows. This is most useful for selective queries over wide files. Leave enabled unless you are troubleshooting filter or read-path behavior. |

## How schemas are inferred

Because federated data does not live in {{es}}, the system discovers schemas before queries can run. How this works depends on the file format.

### Schema sources by format

Parquet reads its schema from file metadata, which also provides column statistics and bloom filters that the engine uses to skip irrelevant data.

For **CSV, TSV, and NDJSON**, schemas are inferred by sampling rows from the data files.

### Schema merge strategies

When a dataset spans multiple files, the files might have different schemas. Set `schema_resolution` in the dataset's `settings` object to choose a strategy:

> - `union_by_name` (default): Merges schemas from all files by column name. Lossless type widening is applied where possible; incompatible types cause an error. This is safer when files can vary, at the cost of reading and merging more file metadata.

Reviewer 2: `union_by_name` never errors on a type conflict — it falls back to `keyword` with a warning. It's `strict` that fails.

```suggestion
- `union_by_name` (default): Merges schemas from all files by column name. Types are widened where possible: when two files disagree with no common type, the column falls back to `keyword` and the response carries a warning suggesting `strict` if you want the conflict to fail instead. `union_by_name` never fails on a type conflict. This is safer when files can vary, at the cost of reading and merging more file metadata.
```

---
navigation_title: "Add datasets"
description: "Create ES|QL Data Federation datasets to query files in external storage. Choose file formats, adjust Parquet and CSV parsing, and control schema inference."
applies_to:

>   stack: preview =9.5

Reviewer 3: wonder why you're choosing the `=` syntax. do we know for sure this is going ga in 9.6? if there is any chance of it slipping, we should just put `9.5` or `9.5+` and then edit this when there is more certainty. not sure how this syntax behaves when 9.6 etc. rolls around and this `=` still persists but I think the tooltip might be confusing

Author: To be followed up in https://github.com/elastic/docs-content-internal/issues/1525

  serverless: preview
products:
  - id: elasticsearch
---

# Select external datasets for {{esql}} Data Federation

> Datasets share the same namespace as indices, data streams, aliases, and [{{esql}} views](esql-views.md). A dataset cannot have the same name as any of them.

Reviewer 3: there is not enough intro text here. why do you want to add a dataset? what does it unlock? this first line is more of a caveat or note on naming 

further in now, I think this needs a prereq of a data source

Author: To be followed up in https://github.com/elastic/docs-content-internal/issues/1525

> ## Supported file formats

Reviewer 3: prob not a now problem, but this pushes the active instructions pretty far down the page. wonder if the info should be split (one is reference, one is procedure)

Author: To be followed up in https://github.com/elastic/docs-content-internal/issues/1525

| Format | Recognized extensions |
|---|---|
| CSV | `.csv` |
| TSV | `.tsv` |
| NDJSON | `.ndjson`, `.jsonl`, `.json` |

### Compression for text formats

A text resource is read uncompressed, or compressed with a codec identified from a trailing extension: `clicks.csv`, `clicks.csv.gz`, `clicks.csv.zst`.

| Codec | Extensions |
|---|---|
| uncompressed | none |
| gzip | `.gz`, `.gzip` |
| zstd | `.zst`, `.zstd` |

### Parquet

Parquet declares its compression internally, per column chunk, so Parquet resources are not externally compressed. They are recognized by the `.parquet` and `.parq` extensions. The following internal codecs are supported:

- `UNCOMPRESSED`
- `SNAPPY`
- `ZSTD`
- `GZIP`
- `LZ4_RAW`
- `LZ4` (legacy Hadoop-framed format, supported for reading only)

## Manage datasets in the UI

In {{kib}}, you create and manage datasets from the **Datasets** tab under **Data management** > **{{esql}} Data Federation**.

The **Datasets** tab lists each dataset including:
- its data source and data source type
- its resource
- its description

From this tab you can search your datasets, filter by data source, add a new one, and edit or delete an existing one.

> :::{image} images/data-federation/datasets-tab.png

Reviewer 3: screenshot of this relatively low value. would suggest removing

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/146945/commits/affeef8e8fee

:alt: The Datasets tab listing several datasets with their data sources, resources, and edit and delete row actions
:width: 800px
:::

### Add a new dataset

Click **Add dataset** to open a flyout where you define the dataset:

- **Data source**: the connected data source to read through.
- **Name**: a unique name for use in queries.
- **Description**: an optional description.
- **Resource**: the URI and glob pattern that selects the files to read.
- **Format**: the file format. This selection is required in the {{kib}} UI. The API can omit `settings.format` to auto-detect it from the file extension. Refer to [supported file formats](#supported-file-formats).

To configure how the format is read, expand **Advanced settings**. Refer to [dataset settings](#dataset-settings).

> ::::{dropdown} Show the Add dataset flyout

Reviewer 3: would prefer this image not to exist unless we have a really specific reason for it. we've described the fields and there are no surprises here

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/146945/commits/affeef8e8fee

:::{image} images/data-federation/add-dataset.png
:alt: The Add dataset flyout configured for a Parquet dataset over an Amazon S3 data source
:width: 450px
:::
::::

## Manage datasets using the API

> Datasets are managed under the `/_query/dataset` endpoint. All dataset operations require the index `manage` privilege on the dataset name, or a fine-grained dataset privilege (refer to [manage credentials and privileges](esql-data-federation-security.md)).

Reviewer 3: same bracket note

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/leemthompo/elasticsearch/commit/d9fdbe7d3a3bb798b0c36546fc1729b2210cea65

| Operation | Endpoint |
|---|---|
| [Create or update](#create-or-update-a-dataset) | `PUT /_query/dataset/{name}` |
| [Get](#get-a-dataset) | `GET /_query/dataset/{name}` |
| [List all](#list-all-datasets) | `GET /_query/dataset` |
| [Delete](#delete-a-dataset) | `DELETE /_query/dataset/{name}` |

<!-- # https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-esql-put-dataset -->
<!-- # https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-esql-get-dataset -->
<!-- # https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-esql-delete-dataset -->

### Create or update a dataset

`PUT` creates a new dataset or replaces an existing one entirely.

:::{important}

> A dataset cannot have the same name as an existing index, data stream, alias, or view, because dataset names share the same namespace. Dataset names must be lowercase and cannot begin with `-`, `_`, or `+`.

Reviewer 3: same limitation applies to ui path

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/leemthompo/elasticsearch/commit/d9fdbe7d3a3bb798b0c36546fc1729b2210cea65

:::

::::{tab-set}
:group: api-ref

:::{tab-item} Console
:sync: console
```console
PUT /_query/dataset/access_logs
{
  "data_source": "prod_s3_logs",
  "resource": "s3://logs-bucket/access/**/*.parquet",
  "description": "Production access logs",
  "settings": {
    "partition_detection": "hive"
  }
}
```
:::

:::{tab-item} curl
:sync: curl
```bash
curl -X PUT "${ELASTICSEARCH_URL}/_query/dataset/access_logs" \
  -H "Authorization: ApiKey ${API_KEY}" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
  "data_source": "prod_s3_logs",
  "resource": "s3://logs-bucket/access/**/*.parquet",
  "description": "Production access logs",
  "settings": {
    "partition_detection": "hive"
  }
}'
```
:::

::::

:::{tip}

> After creating a dataset, you can check the field mappings that {{es}} inferred from your files. Refer to [check field mappings](esql-data-federation-quickstart.md#check-field-mappings) in the quickstart for a worked example.

Reviewer 3: unless we use this concept consistently across our docs, word seems unnecessary 

```suggestion
After creating a dataset, you can check the field mappings that {{es}} inferred from your files. Refer to [check field mappings](esql-data-federation-quickstart.md#check-field-mappings) in the quickstart for an example.
```

:::

### Declare a dataset mapping

> By default, {{es}} infers a dataset's schema from its files. You can instead add an optional `mappings` block to the create or update request to control column names and types. Dataset mappings are currently available only through the API. The {{kib}} **Add dataset** flyout does not expose them.

Reviewer 3: we should say this higher up as a limitation of the ui so people can choose the right path

Author: Already addressed in a prior commit. Naming constraints are noted in the UI fields section above.

The following example declares the complete schema, renames the physical `event_time` column to `@timestamp`, supplies its date format, and uses `request_id` as the row's `_id`:

```console
PUT /_query/dataset/access_logs
{
  "data_source": "prod_s3_logs",
  "resource": "s3://logs-bucket/access/**/*.csv",
  "mappings": {
    "dynamic": "false",
    "properties": {
      "@timestamp": {
        "type": "date",
        "path": "event_time",
        "format": "yyyy-MM-dd HH:mm:ss"
      },
      "request_id": { "type": "keyword" },
      "service": { "type": "keyword" },
      "status_code": { "type": "integer" }
    },
    "_id": {
      "path": "request_id"
    }
  }
}
```

> The `mappings` block supports:

Reviewer 3: should qualify with a noun. "the following properties"?

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/146945/commits/affeef8e8fee

For self-describing columnar formats such as Parquet, names bind to the file schema the same way, and a declared type is accepted when the file's type can be coerced to it. Only incompatible type pairs are rejected.
:::

### Get a dataset

Retrieves a dataset by name.

::::{tab-set}
:group: api-ref

:::{tab-item} Console
:sync: console
```console
GET /_query/dataset/access_logs
```
:::

:::{tab-item} curl
:sync: curl
```bash
curl -X GET "${ELASTICSEARCH_URL}/_query/dataset/access_logs" \
  -H "Authorization: ApiKey ${API_KEY}"
```
:::

::::

### List all datasets

Returns all registered datasets.

::::{tab-set}
:group: api-ref

:::{tab-item} Console
:sync: console
```console
GET /_query/dataset
```
:::

:::{tab-item} curl
:sync: curl
```bash
curl -X GET "${ELASTICSEARCH_URL}/_query/dataset" \
  -H "Authorization: ApiKey ${API_KEY}"
```
:::

::::

### Delete a dataset

Deletes a dataset by name.

::::{tab-set}
:group: api-ref

:::{tab-item} Console
:sync: console
```console
DELETE /_query/dataset/access_logs
```
:::

:::{tab-item} curl
:sync: curl
```bash
curl -X DELETE "${ELASTICSEARCH_URL}/_query/dataset/access_logs" \
  -H "Authorization: ApiKey ${API_KEY}"
```
:::

::::

> ## Dataset settings

Reviewer 3: this one we probably want to split out as reference content too. a dataset is analogous to an index, so I'd actually expect this to sit beside the index settings reference and then cross-referenced (or, at min, standalone)

Author: To be followed up in https://github.com/elastic/docs-content-internal/issues/1525

### Parquet

Parquet is self-describing and is read with no settings in the common case. Its two settings are read-performance toggles, defaulted on.

| Setting | Default | Description |
|---|---|---|
| `optimized_reader` | `true` | Uses vectorized decoding, page skipping, and I/O prefetch for the next row group. Leave enabled for normal scans. Disable it only to troubleshoot a suspected optimized-reader issue by using the baseline read path. |
| `late_materialization` | `true` | When a filter can be pushed to the reader, reads predicate columns first and materializes other projected columns only for surviving rows. This is most useful for selective queries over wide files. Leave enabled unless you are troubleshooting filter or read-path behavior. |

## How schemas are inferred

Because federated data does not live in {{es}}, the system discovers schemas before queries can run. How this works depends on the file format.

### Schema sources by format

Parquet reads its schema from file metadata, which also provides column statistics and bloom filters that the engine uses to skip irrelevant data.

> For **CSV, TSV, and NDJSON**, schemas are inferred by sampling rows from the data files.

Reviewer 3: the formats of these two sentences do not match but should (bold or not - consider bullets with an intro sentence)

```suggestion
For CSV, TSV, and NDJSON, schemas are inferred by sampling rows from the data files.
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/146945/commits/16397f6ac32d
